Pystan unsupported (#8)
mitzimorris/stan-website: install/install.qmd

Note: this will also install CmdStan and any system prerequesites.
:::::

> ::::: {.Install #install-cmdstanr-github-src .hidden}

Reviewer: I think capitalizing this one and not the others would break things?

Run `git clone https://github.com/stan-dev/cmdstan.git --recursive`

This will download the source code from the current development branch of CmdStan into a directory named cmdstan,
along with the submodules for core Stan code and the Stan math library.

Then follow [these instructions to build CmdStan](https://mc-stan.org/docs/cmdstan-guide/installation.html#building-cmdstan){target="_blank"}.
:::::
<!-- ---------- RStan ---------- -->
::::: {.install #install-rstan-cran .hidden}
In R, run `install.packages("rstan")`

For more information, see the
[RStan Getting Started wiki](https://github.com/stan-dev/rstan/wiki/RStan-Getting-Started){target="_blank"}
:::::
::::: {.install #install-rstan-runiverse .hidden}
In R, run `install.packages("rstan", repos = c('https://stan-dev.r-universe.dev', getOption("repos")))`.

For more information, see the
[RStan Getting Started wiki](https://github.com/stan-dev/rstan/wiki/RStan-Getting-Started){target="_blank"}
:::::
::::: {.install #install-rstan-conda .hidden}
Run `conda install -c conda-forge r-rstan`.

Note: this will also install any system prerequisites.
:::::
::::: {.install #install-rstan-github-src .hidden}

> Run `git clone https://github.com/stan-dev/rstan.git --recursive`

Reviewer: This should be `remotes::install_github("stan-dev/rstan", ref = "develop", subdir = "rstan/rstan")`

And link to https://github.com/stan-dev/rstan/wiki/Installing-RStan-from-Source

For more information, see the
[RStan Getting Started wiki](https://github.com/stan-dev/rstan/wiki/RStan-Getting-Started){target="_blank"}
:::::
<!-- ---------- Stan.jl ---------- -->
::::: {.install #install-stan.jl-julia-pkg .hidden}
To install Stan.jl e.g. in the Julia REPL: `] add Stan`,
then use Conda.jl or conda to install CmdStan.

See [Stan.jl documentation](http://stanjulia.github.io/Stan.jl/v6.0/INSTALLATION.html) for further details.
:::::
::::: {.install #install-stan.jl-github-src .hidden}
Run `https://github.com/StanJulia/Stan.jl.git`,

> then follow instructions in the README file.

Reviewer: This seems like it is missing some steps.

In general the way to do this in Julia is to clone the repository, launch Julia from inside it, and then `] dev .`

:::::

::::
:::

<script src="installer.js"></script>

::: {.callout-note}
Conda simplifies the installation process by ensuring that all required libraries and tools are compatible with each other
and is available for Linux, Mac, and Windows platforms.

You can either install [miniconda](https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/miniconda.html), a free, minimal installer for conda
or you can get the full [Anaconda](https://docs.continuum.io/anaconda/) system
which provides graphical installer wizards for [MacOS](https://www.anaconda.com/products/distribution#macos){target="_blank"}
and [Windows](https://www.anaconda.com/products/distribution#windows){target="_blank"} users.

Julia users can install [Conda.jl](https://github.com/JuliaPy/Conda.jl){target="_blank"}.
:::

## Prerequisite:  C++17

Stan requires a C++17 compiler and the GNU Make utility.

* On Linux, these are bundled into the meta-package `build-essential`.
To install, run command:\
`sudo apt-get install build-essential`

* On Mac, these are included with Xcode.
Install Xcode from the App Store and then run command:\
`xcode-select --install`

> * On Windows 10, we strongly recommend first installing Anaconda or miniconda and then using the conda installer to be CmdStanR or RStan,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* On Windows 10, we strongly recommend users install Anaconda or miniconda and then use the conda installation options above,
```

since the conda packages include a C++ toolchain.\
Alternatively, R Users can get [Rtools](https://cran.r-project.org/bin/windows/Rtools/){target="_blank"} from CRAN,

> or try to install it from within CmdStanR using the `install_toolchain` method.

Reviewer: CmdStanPy also still has a function for this, and we should link to the docs for both of them

Author: this function isn't listed in the CmdStanR docs, nor the CmdStanPy ones (?)

Reviewer: In cmdstanpy I think it’s spelled install_cxx_toolchain

There’s also an argument to the install_cmdstan function you can pass

Author: added.

## Local CmdStan installations for CmdStanPy, CmdStanR, and Stan.jl

CmdStanPy, CmdStanR and require a local CmdStan installation and provide scripts and methods to manage this.
The default installation location is in the user's home directory and is named `.cmdstan` (a hidden directory).
This directory contains one or more versions of CmdStan.
Both interfaces provide the following functions to manage the CmdStan installations:

* `install_cmdstan` - downloads, installs, and builds the latest CmdStan relese or specified release
* `rebuild_cmdstan` - rebuild the specified release.  On Mac, often required after an Xcode update.

> * `show_versions` - shows all installed CmdStan versions

Reviewer: CmdStanR does not appear to have this function. It does have `cmdstan_version`

* `cmdstan_path` - shows which version of CmdStan is being used
* `set_cmdstan_path` - specify which version of CmdStan to use.

For Stan.jl, use Conda.jl or conda to install CmdStan.

## Other Stan Interfaces {#other-packages}

> * Google Colab - prebuilt CmdStan binaries for Google Colab are available from the [GitHub CmdStan releases page](https://github.com/stan-dev/cmdstan/releases){target="_blank"}.

Reviewer: We probably need to explain more about how to use these - and that you don't need to, just that it's faster

Author: added a note - but not full instructions.

## Local CmdStan installations for CmdStanPy, CmdStanR, and Stan.jl

CmdStanPy, CmdStanR, and Stan.jl and require a local CmdStan installation.
Both CmdStanPy and CmdStanR provide method `install_cmdstan` to do this from within Python or R;
and CmdStanPy also provides this as a command-line function.
See the online documentation:

* CmdStanPy:  [install_cmdstan function](https://mc-stan.org/cmdstanpy/installation.html#function-install-cmdstan)
* CmdStanR: [install_cmdstan function](https://mc-stan.org/cmdstanr/reference/install_cmdstan.html)
* Stan.jl [build instructions](https://github.com/StanJulia/Stan.jl/blob/master/INSTALLING_CMDSTAN.md)

The default installation location is in the user's home directory and is named `.cmdstan` (a hidden directory).
This directory contains one or more versions of CmdStan.

Both CmdStanPy and CmdStanR provide the following functions:

* `rebuild_cmdstan` - rebuild the specified release.  On Mac, often required after an Xcode update.
* `show_versions` - shows all installed CmdStan versions
* `cmdstan_path` - shows which version of CmdStan is being used
* `set_cmdstan_path` - specify which version of CmdStan to use.

> ## Other Stan Interfaces {#other-packages}

Reviewer: Add `brms`, `rstanarm`, `rethinking` as higher-level interfaces (or perhaps a new section for these?)

Author: added.

<script src="installer.js"></script>

## Installers

> #### Native installers:

Reviewer: I don't think this re-organization is helpful to users; it reads like how we, as Stan developers, think of things, not how a user would.

e.g., there is no reason that "install.packages" and "pip" should be mentioned in the same section -- users of one will almost assuredly not care about the other, or at least not enough that it will be helpful

Author: good point.  simplified.
